# Racial Wealth Gap


- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA)](#exploratory-data-analysis-eda)
  - [Family Wealth](#family-wealth)
  - [Lifetime Wealth](#lifetime-wealth)
  - [Home Ownership](#home-ownership)
  - [Retirement](#retirement)
- [Summary of Findings](#summary-of-findings)
- [Systemic Patterns and
  Implications](#systemic-patterns-and-implications)

# Introduction

Over the past 50 years, the racial wealth gap between Black and White
families in the United States has not improved. The gap remains very
large, mainly because of ongoing inequality in wealth, income,
education, and other areas. These gaps continue because of historical
and systemic racism built into American institutions and policies.

This analysis will explore the differences in wealth trends between
Black and White families from 1963 to 2016 and highlight how these gaps
have changed over time.

Data can be found in this [Github
Repo](https://github.com/rfordatascience/tidytuesday/tree/master/data/2021/2021-02-09).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA)

## Family Wealth

![](RacialWealthGap_files/figure-commonmark/unnamed-chunk-5-1.png)

The data clearly shows a long-standing and large racial wealth gap in
the United States over the past 30 years. White families have
consistently had more wealth than Black families during this entire
period.

In 1983, White families had about 4.8 times more wealth than Black
families. By 2016, even after decades of economic growth and policy
changes, this gap had grown larger, with White families now having 6.6
times more wealth than Black families. This shows economic inequality
between races has actually gotten worse, not better.

While all groups saw some increase in wealth during this time, the
increases were extremely uneven. White family wealth rose from about
$324,000 in 1983 to nearly $930,000 in 2016—an increase of over
$600,000. Black family wealth grew from around $67,000 to only $140,000,
gaining just $73,000. For every dollar Black families gained, White
families gained more than eight dollars.

The financial crisis of 2008 harmed all families, but White families
recovered faster and more completely. By 2016, their wealth not only
recovered but surpassed pre-crisis levels, while Black families
struggled to catch up.

This visualization illustrates clearly how economic growth has largely
benefited White families. It suggests there are larger problems within
the economic system that continue to limit financial opportunity for
Black Americans, causing this wealth gap to grow rather than shrink over
time.

## Lifetime Wealth

![](RacialWealthGap_files/figure-commonmark/unnamed-chunk-6-1.png)

This visualization clearly shows a large and long-lasting difference in
average lifetime wealth between Black and White Americans. White
Americans consistently build up significantly more wealth over their
lifetimes—around $370,000 compared to just $208,000 for Black Americans.
This gives White Americans roughly a 78% advantage.

This $162,000 gap can be explained by multiple connected factors: large
differences in lifetime income (White men earn around $2.7 million over
a lifetime compared to $1.8 million for Black men), unequal
opportunities like homeownership and retirement saving, and the lasting
effects of historical barriers that prevented Black families from
building wealth.

These gaps are important because lifetime wealth—not just annual
income—influences a family’s ability to handle financial emergencies,
secure retirement, and pass on financial help to future generations. The
fact that this gap hasn’t changed significantly over time highlights how
economic inequalities affect people throughout their lives, building up
disadvantages that impact future generations as well.

## Home Ownership

![](RacialWealthGap_files/figure-commonmark/unnamed-chunk-7-1.png)

This visualization shows a troubling gap in homeownership trends between
racial groups. Despite 40 years of economic growth and housing policies,
homeownership among Black Americans actually declined by 2.6 percentage
points from 1976 to 2016.

This decline is very different from other groups: White Americans saw a
small 0.4 percentage point increase (from already high rates). This
widening gap clearly shows that housing opportunities—and the wealth
they create—are not shared equally.

This trend matters because homeownership is the main way most American
families build wealth. Declining Black homeownership contributes
directly to the wider wealth gap we’ve discussed.

Several reasons might explain this: the 2008 housing crisis hurt Black
communities more severely, discrimination in lending continues, lower
incomes make it harder to save for home down payments, and rising costs
(gentrification) in traditionally Black neighborhoods push people out.

Overall, these findings tell us that despite laws meant to ensure
fairness in housing, structural problems continue to limit Black
Americans’ access to homeownership. This has gotten worse over time and
represents a real setback in creating economic fairness.

## Retirement

![](RacialWealthGap_files/figure-commonmark/unnamed-chunk-8-1.png)

This visualization shows a major racial gap in retirement savings, which
has grown significantly between 1989 and 2016. White families have built
around $158,000 in retirement savings, about 6 times more than Black
($29,000) families.

This $128,000 gap means years of difference in retirement security. All
groups started at lower levels in 1989, but White families’ savings grew
rapidly as retirement savings shifted from company pensions to
individual retirement accounts. Black families, however, saw only very
small improvements during this period.

The gap results from several factors: unequal incomes, uneven access to
employer-sponsored retirement plans, families having limited wealth to
pass down to children, and inequalities in the financial system. This
has serious consequences. Black Americans have greater risk of poverty
as they age, higher dependence on limited Social Security benefits,
delayed retirement age, and less ability to handle financial
uncertainty.

Unless there are changes in the current system, this gap in retirement
savings will keep racial inequality going for generations, negatively
affecting the financial security and dignity of millions of older
Americans.

# Summary of Findings

My analysis of racial economic disparities across multiple
dimensions—total wealth, lifetime earnings, homeownership, and
retirement savings—reveals a troubling pattern of persistent and often
widening gaps between White Americans and racial minorities,
particularly Black Americans.

1.  **Widening Total Wealth Gap:** The wealth disparity between White
    and Black families has grown significantly, from White families
    having 4.8 times more wealth than Black families in 1983 to 6.6
    times more by 2016. While White family wealth grew by over $600,000
    (from $324,000 to $930,000), Black family wealth increased by just
    $73,000 (from $67,000 to $140,000)—meaning White families gained $8
    for every $1 gained by Black families.

2.  **Lifetime Wealth Accumulation:** White Americans accumulate
    approximately $370,000 in median lifetime wealth compared to
    $208,000 for Black Americans—a 78% advantage or $162,000 gap. This
    reflects substantial lifetime earning disparities, with White men
    earning $2.7 million versus $1.8 million for Black men.

3.  **Declining Black Homeownership:** While White homeownership rates
    increased (by 0.4 and 3.3 percentage points respectively) between
    1976 and 2016, Black homeownership actually declined by 2.6
    percentage points—a striking regression in a critical
    wealth-building mechanism.

4.  **Retirement Security Crisis:** The retirement savings gap has
    reached alarming levels, with White families accumulating $158,000
    in retirement assets compared to just $25,000 for Black families, an
    over 6 times difference that threatens the dignity and security of
    millions of aging Americans.

# Systemic Patterns and Implications

These disparities are not isolated phenomena but interconnected
manifestations of systemic inequalities. Several consistent patterns
emerge:

1.  **Compounding Disadvantages:** Initial disparities in income and
    opportunity compound over time through reduced investment returns,
    homeownership barriers, and limited retirement savings access.
2.  **Crisis Vulnerability:** Economic downturns like the 2008 financial
    crisis disproportionately impact minorities, with White Americans
    recovering more quickly and completely.
3.  **Intergenerational Effects:** These gaps perpetuate across
    generations as reduced wealth limits educational opportunities and
    financial support for children.
4.  **Policy Failure:** Despite decades of economic growth and
    anti-discrimination policies, racial economic gaps have persisted or
    worsened, suggesting current approaches are insufficient.

The combined effect of these disparities creates a comprehensive system
of economic disadvantage that extends beyond individual dimensions.
Without significant structural intervention, these gaps will likely
continue to widen, threatening America’s promise of equal opportunity
and economic mobility for all citizens.
